All right, guys, welcome back.
We've been talking about PR in this
section and the current state of press,
what a reporter's day is like and how people use
pitches to get coverage instead of writing moldy
old press releases that you just push
out and hope someone picks up on.
I'm going to cover four steps on how you find,
research, contact, and then write effective pitches for
those reporters that you want to target.
But first I want to give you a little more background
on some core PR and press concepts.
Armed with these concepts, hopefully you will not run
into any situations where you don't know what they're
talking about - * What the hell are you
talking about? * - or you just make a flub bub.
Now, in this lecture, I'm going to talk about the concept
of laddering up, the concept of press embargoes,
and what the term on spec means, three concepts
that are absolutely crucial to be successful. If you
skip this lecture and then you are unsuccessful,
I'm not surprised.
OK.
So, for the first concept, let's talk about laddering up.
Well, the fact of the matter is this. You're not going to
get covered by the New York Times right off the bat
once you start your press efforts. Why is it?
Well, the New York Times covers really big stories,
really important stories, and they're kind of the top
of the food chain.
Now, if your goal is to develop bigger coverage
over time, well, you need to build up your appeal.
Now, the way you do this is by laddering up.
Now, this can be done by getting coverage in smaller,
less popular blogs, then using that success as validation
to promote and pitch yourself to
the next level, then the next level,
then the next level. As it turns out, all press outlets
out there are kind of in a tier system, you have
the lower level ones, then you have medium, then you
have higher, then you have these, like, epic ones that
everyone wants to be in.
As it turns out, it's kind of a hierarchy, so the ones
at the very top look to the level below them for
signals on good stories.
They look below them,
they look below them, all the way down to the bottom.
So what ends up happening is good stories get picked
up by really scrappy blogs that don't have millions
of visitors and have kind of the leeway to pick
and choose what they really want to cover,
they cover it, then it gets picked up, then
it gets picked up, and it travels up the chain.
Now, this method is pretty commonly used by startups to
get press coverage, and this is what we call it - laddering up.
It's also called trading up.
If you guys ever read Ryan Holiday's book, it's about getting
press, he calls it trading up, but laddering up, trading
up, pretty much the same concept. Start low,
then you parlay your success with the easy to get
into ones to go to the next ones, to go to the next
ones, to go to the next ones, and then eventually you get
into the New York Times, because you got into one that's
well-read, but it's not as well-read as that one.
Now, imagine if you were building a building where the
ground floor is full of aspiring writers and bloggers,
people who want to write about the
industry, make a name for themselves,
build a following, perhaps write for a media site one day.
There's a lot of those people out there
and they're hungry for ideas.
For example, maybe you're a New Jersey based app
developer and you have an app that you're trying to
promote. Local bloggers and news sites are always
interested in local stories, especially since bigger
outlets might miss them or just flat out ignore them.
So you could reach out to a place
like the New Jersey Tech Weekly.
They focus on New Jersey related tech news, so their
following isn't huge, but it's very narrow and it's a start.
So if you find an outlet that looks promising,
you might think about pitching yourself to them.
The number of pitches an outlet like this would get
on a daily basis are much, much lower than a big
industry site for sure.
So you have a better chance of being considered and
getting to know them, and in fact pitch doesn't have
to be as good.
You can kind of polish it and refine it
as you move up the chain.
Once you get published a few times this way, then you
can just parlay that success into something bigger.
Now imagine that building again,
but now you take the elevator up one floor, climb
a ladder, I guess, this is laddering up after all,
and on the next floor it's less crowded,
but these mid-level writers have achieved some success of
their own, writing for more successful blogs or media sites.
They're still pretty narrow and niche, but we're now talking
about audiences that are an order of magnitude larger.
These reporters are also looking for ideas,
but their taste is a bit more selective.
They get more pitches than the lower guys, but you
can bet a lot of the pitches are from first timers
hoping to get noticed. You, on the other hand,
have achieved success already, so mention it.
Pitch your idea and let these mid-tier writers know
you've got covered in these various sites already.
That is the validation people want.
Reporters can't immediately tell
if this is a newsworthy story,
so a lot of times you say, "Hey, look these people
already said it was newsworthy," and you can even say
how many times this got shared or something like that.
That is very effective.
With each successful pitch then you can add that to
your arsenal of references to mention the next time
you pitch yourself.
Eventually, you can take a crack at the top four big
players in your industry, whether they're, I don't
know, if you're in tech it's probably Tech Crunch or
Mashable or whoever, and then you can go even on
to the more national outlets like The Wall
Street Journal, or the BBC, or whatever.
Develop your own success and use it
to promote yourself on the next level.
OK.
So that's the concept of laddering up, and it's
a process you can use to find some success.
And in general, if you want to really get the most out of press,
you should take this in mind, start low and then trade up.
Another concept worth understanding is something
that you'll hear occasionally and it's something
that in the heat of things someone might
ask you about and it might throw you off.
That's called an embargo. Now, an embargo is a concept that is
a little more into the realm of intermediate PR or advanced PR.
Basically, what it means is when you're doing something
that's timely or you're announcing something
that's going to launch soon or on a specific date, what
you can often do is execute an embargo and that
means you tell outlets and press and blogs,
"This is when it launches. Please
do not cover it until this time."
Now, the benefit of doing that is that it allows you
to get more coverage potentially because if you
tell six different places, "Hey, this launches on this date, you
can only cover it on this date, please don't say before that,"
well, then it's much easier for everyone to then organize
around it, know that "On this date we have to put it
on our schedule to publish it."
Otherwise, what ends up happening is you pitch one,
they release it, then you pitch the next one, and
they say, "Hey, someone already covered it."
So with an embargo they all kind of pitch it at the same
time, so they don't have that problem of looking
over their shoulder and saying, "Well, I'm not original, am I?"
So that's a concept worth looking at.
I know a lot of press people like writers don't
like embargoes, because well, think about it.
It makes their day a lot harder.
They have a really hard day anyway, but now they also
have to think about when they can publish something,
and also drives editors kind of crazy, because it goes
against their instincts. They want to find a scoop,
and then they want to publish it, and they want
to be the one that's got there first, basically,
put their flag onto the top of the mountain first.
And that kind of leads me to a very
related concept, and that's an exclusive.
Now, this would be the opposite basically of doing an
embargo, where an exclusive, what you do is you'd
pitch to one outlet and say, "This is my story,
I'm offering you an exclusive if you want to do it,
I haven't told anyone else about it."
What that means is, to them, if they choose to do it,
well, then they're the only one that's going to get
this specific story, that's really
valuable to writers and reporters.
Now, typically exclusives are something you're going
to probably try to execute on if, for instance, you're
pitching to people and you're getting lukewarm
reactions from like four or five different outlets.
They're kind of interested, but not
enough interest to pull the trigger.
What you can do in those cases is instead pick one,
offer an exclusive, and generally speaking, that
makes it more of an enticing offer to them,
makes it more likely that they'll cover it.
If they say no, you just move to the next one,
move to the next one, move to the next one.
So it's a question of, do you pitch five
hoping that one of them covers you,
or do you pitch one knowing there's
a good chance they cover you?
Exclusives are kind of an example where you're not
maximizing the press you're getting, you're guaranteeing
that you get something. Embargoes, on the other hand,
you're kind of gambling the opposite, you're gambling
that lots of people will cover you, especially if I let
everybody know this is the start line for the race.
Now, the last concept I want to explain
is the concept of on spec writing.
Remember that we said that reporters are lazy?
Well, they're really, really, really busy.
And hey, it's really not their fault.
Anything they can make their lives
and jobs easier is welcomed.
Well, what if instead of pitching
them a great idea about you,
what if you wrote the entire article for them?
I know, it sounds crazy.
There's actually a term for this kind of writing
and it's called on spec writing. On spec is short for
on speculation, because you're hoping that this article
fits what they're looking for and then you can
actually put it in their
publication. Now, the concept kind
of fits into a spectrum out there.
Some outlets don't have enough to write about and
so their standards for what they'll accept is going
to be lower. I mean standards as in you
don't have to do as much work for them.
Those people might accept an idea, like an explanation
pitch, or they might even accept a headline pitch.
You don't necessarily have to write it for them. Now,
ones that are more busy, more demanding,
and they have a higher kind of bar to entry,
those ones often will expect on spec writing,
unless you've written for them before.
Why?
Because, well, they have never heard of you before and
you just pitch them a headline.
Are they really going to spend time working with you,
reading through it, and editing it if they have no idea
if you're going to be worth their time? They have
to deal with a lot of people, hundreds of people.
So a lot of them will just expect on spec stuff if you're
brand new, and in some cases, some outlets will
just flat out only accept on spec.
Really it's just a way to save them time,
and if they have more pitches than they can cover,
well, then they have the leverage to do that.
Now, of course, the flip side is occasionally you find
writers who don't want you to write on spec specifically,
and I think that's more because they find it more
work to change the spec writing to fit their own or
it takes too long to even read through it,
but that's usually the minority.
So this is something that you're going
to have to think about going forward.
It's something that is kind of a lever you can pull
if you're not having success with something. If you're
pitching people and you're not
getting a response, oftentimes
you can go down to less selective, less kind of distributed
outlets, and that means you'll be competing with fewer people.
Now, that's one way of doing it, but also another way of
doing it is to spend more time upfront on your own
writing the articles.
Sometimes you can write an outline
for them and that's good enough.
Sometimes you have to go full on spec
and write the whole thing for them.
Now, it does sound like "Oh wow, it's an enormous
amount of work to write all these articles to pitch them and
just throw them away when no one accepts them."
Well, what you can do is focus all your efforts on writing
one really good one, and then pitch that out, and
if they say no, then either retool it
or just repitch it to the next outlet.
There's enough outlets out there that cover the same
stuff that you can very often use the same article
for five or six or seven different
places until it gets picked up.
All right, anyway, so those are three crucial concepts.
We have the laddering up, also called trading up,
we have embargoes and exclusives, and then we have
writing on spec or on speculation articles upfront to help
increase the chances of getting covered.
Makes sense? No?
Well, not surprised. This is probably brand new. Anyway,
well, now we're going to go into the first of the four
steps that I mentioned earlier for finding, researching,
contacting, and pitching the reporters
that you want to reach so badly.
We'll start that discussion in our next lecture.
See you then.